Yesterday, I was making references to the “Mudhal Mariyaadhai” movie
and had quipped that I had a bit more to share about it in the forthcoming episodes
Many of you wondered — what more there could be. So, here goes
Let me slake your curiosity right away!
Why don’t we watch a short clip from the movie itself?!
<Movie clip>
Observe his behaviour carefully.
Before giving it a try, he looks around furtively.. He wants to ensure that nobody is watching
<Movie clip>
He fails the first time, but it doesn’t count, does it? Because? Nobody noticed!
And, as nobody noticed the first failure, if and when he succeeds, he can claim that he succeeded at the first attempt! :-)
Look at this story now
A lawyer is accusing a “poor old lady” of some crime.
The lady pleads — It makes no difference what I say. You already seem to have decided I am guilty
The lawyer uses even that statement from the lady against her, by turning it around!
See? See? He bellows! The “witch” seems to know what I am about to say!
And, thus, this woman is not an ordinary innocent woman, she is a witch! (And hence deserves to be burned at the stake!)
In other words, he is committing the logical folly of “Concluding based on an argument that only takes into account facts that are favourable to his case”.
We saw two stories. Here, let us see a third one
There is this thing that used to do the rounds on the internet — a table that linked Lincoln’s and Kennedy’s assassinations.
There are many more such factoids — you can pause the screen and read through them — or you can even go on google to find out more about it.
Lincoln was elected to Congress in 1846, while Kennedy’s happened in 1946.
One becomes President in 1860, while the other in 1960
Lincoln had an assistant by name “Kennedy”, and Kennedy, unbelievably, had an assistant named “Lincoln”
Both of them were assassinated with a shot in the back of the head, in the presence of their wife!
Both died on a Friday!
Both of them were killed by assassins whose
names had three parts (first name, middle name, last name) and not the usual two (first name, last name)!
Count the letters in the name and you hit
15 in both!! And so on and on!
Amazing coincidences, they called it!
But, if you really give it scientific scrutiny, and dig a bit deeper, you notice discrepancies!
Lincoln was killed by a pistol shot, while Kennedy’s took a long range rifle.
Lincoln was a Baptist, while Kennedy was a Catholic.
Lincoln died in Washington, while Kennedy was shot at in Texas
Lincoln was coming out of a theatre, Kennedy was in a motorcade.
And, Lincoln is as famous for his beard as Kennedy is for his clean-shaven look!
And, the list goes on!
So, again, if you take only what suits you, only what seems to support your spurious logic, you can go out there and prove that anything is true!
They’ve got a NAME for this sort of thing. They call it the Texas SharpShooter Fallacy.
Where does this name come from? There was a guy in Texas, who liked shooting
(No, he wasn’t all that good at it!)
He goes to his barnyard, shoots some random holes in the fence
and THEN, he goes over
draws concentric circles and bulls-eyes around the bullet-holes that had already been created on the fence.
Aha! Now, passers-by give this guy a wide-berth because they think he is a sharpshooter,
Now, passers-by give this guy a wide-berth
because they think he is a sharpshooter, and means business!
Ignoring the differences..Overemphasising the similarities.
Consider Covid-data.
If I were to fit a curve to the data using a regression algorithm
I may get a linear graph.
What would the ruling party do? They look at the same data, but do a logarithmic curve and claim that numbers are tapering off.
What does the opposition party do? They choose the points that suit their claim that the covid case numbers are growing uncontrollably, and lament that the curve is one of exponential growth!
What is the point I am trying to get across?
There is just one little lesson.
Data science, today, is such a burgeoning field.
Everybody wants to get data-wise.
There is this matter of ethics deeply entwined with this. One of morals.
It is very easy to cheat — it is very easy to be cheated.
Statistics, historically, has always been such a domain.
There is even a famous book to parody that thought. “Lies, Damn Lies, and Statistics” is the title of the book!
Beware!
Until tomorrow then!